---
layout: post
title: "FreeRTOS"
subtitle: "How to use a real-time operating system"
background: '/img/posts/cyber_basics/head_image.jpg'
---

# What is RTOS and why do you want to use it?

Real-time operating systems ("RTOS") are used in embedded systems when more than one task needs to be done concurrently or within a specific amount of time. Imagine a motor controller or an application with user interface where the display needs to be updated while button presses are processed. Depending on your project it might be worth to take a look at a real-time operating system instead of a classical infinte-loop approach.  


## Getting started
In this post I use the [Esp32 feather board from Adafruit](https://www.adafruit.com/product/3405) and program it using FreeRTOS. FreeRTOS is a popular open source real-time operating system which is also used in the industry. The official Vanilla FreeRTOS project has been ported for the ESP32. There are minor differences in using the ESP-IDF FreeRTOS version instead of Vanilla FreeRTOS, but in general they are quite similar.  

To get started download following and configure your IDE of choice. Depending on the IDE you use it might handle it for you:  
 - FreeRTOS from their [Website](https://www.freertos.org/FreeRTOS-quick-start-guide.html)
 - Esp-32 tool-chain  

## Programming using FreeRTOS
When using an RTOS you write tasks instead of writing your code inside the main while-loop. A task is actually just a function. Within each method you use an own while-loop. All the tasks are then registered to the scheduler which when running will give each task a specific amount of runtime over and over again. This is also called time slicing. And because you know how much time each task gets it is called "real-time" operating system. "Real-time" does not mean everything is happening in "real" time, but instead tells you the OS makes sure a task will be finished within a pre-defined time.  
When using an RTOS all the principles of operating system developement come into account. But don't be afraid, it's fun!

### Creating a task
A task is actually just a function and should contain an infinite while-loop. It might look something like that:

        void toggleLED(void *parameter) {
            while(1) {

                // Do something like set a pin high
                digitalWrite(led_pin, HIGH);

                // Delay while letting the scheduler run another task
                vTaskDelay(milliseconds / portTICK_PERIOD_MS); 
                
                // Do something else
                digitalWrite(led_pin, LOW);

                // Again go sleeping and let another task run
                vTaskDelay(milliseconds / portTICK_PERIOD_MS);
            }
        }

When calling the vTaskDelay()-function the scheduler will set the calling task to sleep and let another task run. vTaskDelay() expects the number of ticks to delay. In order to get the number of ticks devide the milliseconds by the "portTICK_PERIOD_MS"-parameter which defaults to 1ms.  

After implementing the task it needs to be registered to the scheduler. In Vanilla FreeRTOS we can use the xTaskCreate()-function. The ESP32 has two cores and by using this function, we do not have controll on which core our task gets executed on. So in ESP-IDF FreeRTOS there is another function called xTaskCreatePinnedToCore() which we use here. Here we can specify "app_cpu" which is core #1 of the ESP32 processor.

        xTaskCreatePinnedToCore(
            toggleLED,              // Our function we implemented above
            "Toggle LED",           // Task's name
            1024,                   // Stack size in bytes (ESP32 specific) (words in Vanilla FreeRTOS)
            NULL,                   // Parameter to pass to our functions - here just NULL
            1,                      // Task priority. In FreeRTOS a higher number means higher priority
            NULL,                   // Task handle with which it is possible to i.e. stop the task
            app_cpu                 // Run on core #1
                                    // In the ESP32 app_cpu is cpu #1 and pro_cpu is cpu #0
        );

### Start the scheduler
After creating tasks the scheduler needs to be started. This can be achieved with the vTaskStartScheduler()-function.

        vTaskStartScheduler();


  
## Further information
- [FreeRTOS Website](https://www.freertos.org/FreeRTOS-quick-start-guide.html)
- [ESP-IDF FreeRTOS Documentation](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/stable/esp32/get-started/index.html)
